Jay McInerney.
The red light is going.
It's not an entirely happy proposition.
You know, I think the writers...
traffic and metaphors and symbols, but they shouldn't necessarily be symbols.
And I think that, you know, there's no question that I chronicled in the 80s and New York, New York seemingly the sort of capital of all of the
behavior and excesses that we now associate with the 80s and a lot of people associate me with that behavior and that excess um things they don't like about the 80s probably um i think that in the same way that i was sort of wildly over celebrated as an author i was also made in this kind of scapegoat
sins, the perceived sins of that era.
Yeah, yeah.
And I think I still, one of the things that I've learned is the power of
of the persona, the power of an image, you know.
And he went in the middle and said to me, don't fight it, you know.
The hardest thing for a writer to get is a style, and the second hardest thing is a persona.
And he said, you know,
I think he said it the other way around.
He said a lot of writers have a style, but he said you actually have a public image.
As did he.
As did me, yeah.
But it's fascinating to me how...
how enduring those images could be.
I feel like I've had to gradually lead people away from the idea that I am the character of my life's big city and that's all that I could ever be.
V is a really sort of one-dimensional analogy.
When Michael J. Fox was cast in the
role from the lead in Vital Light's Big City, where he had just come off that television show, Family Tide, and the public had a very powerful image of him as this young Republican, young photo-yuffie, clean-cut kid.
And no matter how great an actor he might be, it was almost impossible for him to be thoroughly convincing in that role.
this i didn't know because i didn't even watch the tv show but in retrospect that's clear to me and it seems likewise that you know when people hear that i spent half my year in tennessee and that i ride horses i have two papers in tennessee right away to take my phone no no really are you talking to frederick couple when we go yeah i don't know i haven't looked at the method schedule yet because he takes my stuff uh
You know, people say, like, you, Tennessee, you, father of twins, as if, you know, for the rest of my life, as if, you know, I was a guy who lived permanently in a nightclub, and it was always 3 a.m., and I was...
always kind of literally dancing the night away, you know what I mean?
It's a bit of a graduate image, you know, on the roof.
For years and years, every time people saw me, they looked like they had Simon Garfunkel singing in the background.
Yeah, they said, blast it.
But here we are, 10 minutes or 15 interviews, and it does get in the way of working, doesn't it?
I mean, yeah.
Well, you know,
I don't mean to whine about it, because I'm all so lucky.
I reached a lot of readers through my first book, and quite a few of them hang on from my other books.
And, you know, it's a very fortunate position to be in, if you're welcome.
if you're a novelist.
But, I don't know, I will be glad when the sort of newer, when and if the newer image of me becomes as real as the old one.
41 years old, father of twins, happily married, mounted on my horse on my farm in Tennessee.
I don't know.
I mean, we've got a little way to get into this Tennessee.
It's kind of funny.
Well, are you enjoying it?
Yeah, yeah, I am.
I mean, I read some place where it's a pain in the ass time.
It's a New York Times.
I don't feel like driving into Nashville every day.
I still have to go to the bottom of the street to get my time.
Well, you know, I do still spend half my year in New York.
And, you know, I think New York will always be a great subject for me.
For better or worse, I find it a great subject.
It seems to be...
something that people expect of me and something that I'm still eager to chronicle.
Although I have to say, after my last book, Brightness Falls, I just thought, I can't possibly write one more word about New York in the 80s, and there doesn't seem to be anything interesting in the air right now.
The zeitgeist was just sort of exhausted back around 92, 91, 92.
It just seemed...
like a good time to get out of town.
And I married someone
I happened to be a native Tennessean.
So, I kind of took that opportunity to step back and step away.
How old was it?
18 months.
A boy and a girl.
His name was Barrett.
John Barrett McInerney III.
And she's amazing.
M-A-I-S-I-E.
My father's mother, it was her maiden name.
They lived in Wellesley.
Irish, as you might imagine.
All my family is from Boston.
I got two papers in Connecticut.
I was born in Hartford.
My parents, grandparents, their grandparents came from, you know, originally I guess from Lotsbury, but later Newton and Wellesley, and to Williams College, and I went to Williams College.
You know, you thought about developing or establishing a style and a person.
Do you hope that you're disabled?
You're taking affirmative steps in that direction.
Well, this movie is definitely a departure, I think.
The first book that has not been particularly autobiographical
The characters in this book are six years older than me, essentially seven years older than me.
I didn't directly experience the 60s, which is probably about my 60s envy, I guess.
As you know, it takes place over 30 years, which is a very long story.
My books tend to take place over a week or two, which in New York is basically an era.
In New York, that's practically a generation, last week and this week.
I just wanted to do something different.
It's turning.
I wanted to do something different.
I wanted to write from something of a historical perspective.
I wanted to, I got kind of inspired being in the South with the sort of long historical perspective that people have there.
And also, starting to spend time in Tennessee, I kind of brought back a lot of material that I had a Memphis, I had a roommate from Memphis in college, not much like Will, because he was very conservative, but
He was wild.
He was very Republican, but he was very colorful, as so many people from that area are.
And I also went to Mississippi when I was in college in several years.
several times later to pursue my love of the blues.
The Mississippi Delta being left.
I used to go for four or five days, probably four or five times in my adult life.
I've got some people too.
Regional residences I've liked to have.
Yeah, well Mississippi was to me a fascinating place.
I also went to see Mississippi.
my first coach managed to visit Faulkner's home and um i was arrested for climbing in the i went back three times and it was never home so i decided to climb in the window and then the police probably came up and dragged me out of the police station yeah yeah but um but being yeah it was good morning actually
I shouldn't have been sober going to Faulkner South, but I was.
Spending time in the South brought all of this material up and away.
I started going into Memphis because I decided
which is, you know, poor Alex and Nashville, but the kind of character that I thought I was interested in writing about, the Will Savage character, there's actually no way he could have come from Nashville.
I mean, Nashville and Memphis really are very different.
I used to think Peter Taylor was full of it, you know, when he comes to Memphis, when he makes this huge distinction, it's like,
It's like falling from paradise to move from one Tennessee town, Nashville, to Memphis.
And I thought, come on, two Tennessee towns, big deal.
But they really are different.
And between the music and the sort of racial history, the character I was interested in could only have been Memphis.
It would have been more convenient for me if I could have made it.
because that's where I was living.
But I was visiting a friend down in Memphis one day, William Eggleston, the photographer.
And I decided to look in the library at the newspaper clips to see what the reaction had been on the ground to the Martin Luther King assassination.
I sort of accidentally came across a clipping about the first interracial marriage in Tennessee.
Believe it or not, it was that same year, 1968.
And I thought, wow, I wonder what that must have been like.
And that sort of...
That was sort of the journey that indirectly set me off on this path, this book.
On and off for three years.
It's a long time for me.
But it was hard.
I didn't have a model.
It was something I liked, something I'd never done before.
I almost gave up on it a couple of times.
But then I'd finish the draft, put it aside, and then actually in between one of the drafts I wrote another novel.
But then I'd go back and say, yeah, now I see how to go on.
Sometimes it would be three months before I went back to it.
I don't know what we've seen so far.
Most of these persons couldn't pick up from each other.
Yeah, excuse me.
Yeah.
You think they might want to order.
It's more about my image.
I mean, it's just it.
I don't see why, you know, late in life, this is my fifth book.
I'm not going to suddenly start trying to imitate somebody else.
Yeah, I disagree.
It has totally to do with its association that, you know,
It was bad for me from the first bullet that he made.
To find something to emulate, I guess.
No, none of that.
But my life paralleled stuff.
I mean, I don't think anybody would say that Brothers Big City was like any other book on the planet.
And the still notion is another sort of biographical snag, I think.
I mean, there certainly may be some...
of Fitzgerald in my work.
I certainly admire him as a writer, but he's not the only writer, or even my favorite writer.
Basically, the fact that I have a first-person narrator
who seems to remind some people of Nick Carraway, is what seems to me to be built on, and it seems ridiculous to me.
I mean, Nick Carraway barely knows Gatsby, even by the end of the book.
It's a book that takes place over the course of a summer, basically.
I mean, this book is about friendship, and it's about...
two guys to know each other for 30 years and all right i just don't remember i mean if anything the book is more like brideshead revisited than it is like the great gatsby it just seems like really it seems to me like a really lazy compulsive
I mean, if you're speaking of the New York Times review, I mean, Michiko Tsai-Pasani has hated my work from this far.
I think she's, you know, a very pedestrian, um, movie, uh, critic, and, you know, from...
Right from my first novel, she sort of trashed me every time out.
I'm not sure why, but at this point, I would be shocked if she didn't hate my books.
What amazes me?
She had some... She passed it off to somebody else.
That is what amazes me, too.
I thought I was finally clear of her, because last time...
Christopher Lemenhout, who reviewed my book Brightest Falls.
It was a great relief.
I mean, first of all, he liked it.
But secondly, just not to have to listen to Michiko Capitani.
Totally missed the point once again, Gary.
And by the way, I don't want to talk about other reviewers.
I might mention how they're all hopping under the film.
Thank you.
I like Gail's review.
Yeah, she's very good.
She's slowest, and she's a lot smarter than me.
I wish we had her in New York.
It's good to have her left.
Do you like the arc of your career, having said all this other stuff about, you know, perceptions of the 80s and yourself and their lifestyle?
I'd like it better if I didn't have to.
sort of poke me the inevitable back rush to my early success, but it is kind of inevitable, I suppose.
You know, I wouldn't really trade it necessarily for a normal career, for a normal literary career, in which, you know, publish a book, sell 25 hundred copies, get a few good reviews, go on, try and publish the next book.
It's doing...
It's been a very interesting life so far.
And I think being sort of grist for the great American dream machine myself, I've learned a lot about culture, being processed and packaged by the media.
Having been put through that process,
That machine, it's almost like being a political candidate.
I think I've learned things about power.
As I said, that's a culture that I wouldn't know otherwise.
Well, it's amazing what happens.
I mean, Mark Altman, for instance, was the darling who went to the Phoenix, and then they found out he was a Republican.
Now he's got a new job.
I mean, now, you know, my brother wants me to go.
I've been with you last year.
It's just amazing, you know.
Where do you live?
It's a beautiful home.
It's living a very domestic life.
It's gorgeous.
It's absolutely gorgeous.
I read something about him driving his tractor around.
Yeah.
About two hours from here.
Now they review his books at all.
You can't worry about that.
That's right.
You know what?
I mean, right as far as actually, right as far as, I can take a break.
I got maybe 70%.
That could have been very reassuring to you.
It is reassuring, but the funny thing is that I don't think that has anything to do with my sales.
The review is very, really good.
It's an interesting thing to observe.
The very first thing out of the box was Dr. Tanya's review.
For some reason, sales of this book, advanced orders and so on,
quite a lot higher than my last book.
And I don't know why.
It has something really independent of that particular process.
And one of the nice things about going out on tour is that it's not just about getting interviews, it's about going to bookstores.
And so every night, I see readers and talk to them and hear what they like.
Have you read?
Anywhere from, oh, I'd say anywhere from college kids to a little older than me.
So you do have a relationship, but it may well be growing.
Well, one of those.
I think you would agree that this is a great book for you.
Yeah.
Acceptance, critical acceptance of the year you were there.
Do you understand where you work at?
Yeah, but I might not get pretty good acceptance for it.
And that's not something I can worry about.
I understand, but artistically it's also that we've discussed all these amazing departures.
And I would say it's an advancement of your work.
I mean, it's a progression of your work.
You can't see it developing at some point 20 or 30 years from now.
You will be able to look at it.
It's a great idea.
is creating a body of work that would be... I mean, I do in the sense that
that I believe, I now have five books, and it's kind of exciting to think, wow, five books, that is kind of a body here.
What I resist slightly, though, is the emotion that
it's necessarily a linear development of some kind.
I'll tell you the critical notion that drives me craziest is what in formal logic is called the intentional fallacy.
And that is this notion of
He obviously wrote this book intending to, you know, or responding to.
I mean, I hate... You know, I sometimes read, when I read these things, which I don't always, when I hear...
some notion of a master plan that I have, you know, and here's why he wrote this.
And I think, I don't know why I wrote that.
The rhyme and reason of the body of work sort of emerges gradually, and it's not a conscious thing.
Jay McInerney, 41 years old in 1996, could not light, still alive, but could not light light today.
I mean, that's his work, and it represents something you did as well as a hell of a many years ago.
It is.
As Heraclitus said, you can't step in the same river twice.
Which is why it really bothers me.
And I really respect like Tim O'Brien.
He tells me that he's going back and tinkering with patriotic.
And I don't think I'm going to keep it.
You're kidding.
For you.
Just for us.
Yeah, just keep going, and he's going to follow this post.
Why would you want to do this?
I have an obligation to make my work as perfect as I can.
I said, you had best dreams for a time 20 years ago, and you know.
I must say that's a mistake.
Is he coming through Tim?
We're old friends, but I have not seen him now in a couple years.
He's terrible.
I read the children's book.
Oh, yeah.
Why not?
I've got a lot of new newspapers now, too, so it's always nice to see.
I have about 25 newspapers that take my pictures.
The best guy it does for me.
Like Eugene Oregon, that guy.
Oh, yeah.
I'm in Salt Lake City, I have Charlottesville, Virginia.
I do this all myself.
I don't have my own syndicate.
Really?
You don't have somebody who sells?
And my wife.
That's awesome.
One of my favorite stuff.
Very nice.
You both did an interview with me and they threw in the studio.
Nicole Miller made one.
They had Bright Lights Big City as one of the books.
Yeah, that's pretty good.
I was pretty psyched about that.
So, what do you, you know, I have a book, of course, and it speaks to myself.
I have a literary review.
I mean, it's the personal stuff.
It would be there.
Which I've met, you know, so it's not necessary for me to ask you what you're doing.
That's my job.
I am interested in the late cargo race, though.
That's very interesting.
I think you can't stick you by the hand and put on up there.
You gotta get out of Manhattan?
Yeah, I just happened to meet him through my best friend who was working at Random House and managed to have lunch with him one day and with his editor, Gordon Licht.
And I had years before given my friend Carver's first book.
We were at Williams together and said, here, you gotta read this.
You won't believe it.
Carver became a real hero for us.
In a way, not to overstate it, but I think in a way, reading Raymond Carver in 1975, 1976, must have been a little bit like reading In Our Time, or Hemingway's Early Stories, because we were in a period, a really baroque period of meta-fiction, and really academic, post-modern fiction,
writing about writing basically.
John Barth and Hoover and John Hawks and William Gass were sort of the dominant influences, certainly on campus, certainly with
How are we doing?
Enjoying this?
Good, yes.
Thank you.
Okay.
Certainly with the, you know, the sort of smart university crowd.
And, you know, I mean, to parody it was kind of like, you know, typically, you know, a novel was about a writer writing a book, you know, and which his characters rebelled against him, you know.
It was very Baroque and...
self-conscious and to suddenly read will you please be quietly it was just like it was like the reinvigoration of the realistic tradition you know you suddenly thought hey realism isn't necessarily dead um you know and and and beady i think from another side was doing the same thing i mean suddenly she started publishing these in a new yorker these
realistic little narratives about contemporary life, you know?
And that was very inspiring for someone who was more interested in writing about life than about books, I'd say.
So when I got the chance a number of years later to meet Oliver, it was really a thrill.
And he came and...
My friend sent him down to my apartment because he had four or five hours before this reading at Columbia, and everybody else had to go back to work.
I was unemployed at the time, so I was supposed to take way around the city.
But we never managed to get out the door because we just started talking.
We sat down and talked for five hours.
And we started corresponding.
And he knew I wanted to be a writer.
I showed him a few of my stories.
And he suggested that I come up and study with him.
And he was teaching at Syracuse at the time.
And it was a wonderful opportunity for me.
I didn't want to move to Syracuse, but that was exactly what I needed.
Three years.
What were the years?
80 to... Well, 80 to 84.
Basically, Bright Lights was written up there.
Did he read it?
Song of Exile from Syracuse.
Did he read it as a written father?
I wrote Bright Lights very fast.
And Ray was out, I wrote in the summer, in between.
And he was out in Washington, I think, that summer.
So he didn't read it until it was finished.
But he gave me a wonderful blog for it, and I think he liked it.
You came out as a paperback to this one, right?
Yeah.
You know, the feeling was that nobody in my generation read.
I think they thought, and by the way, I'm writing a new book about that.
Well, first novels at that time weren't selling.
The wisdom was that no one wanted to read a first novel.
No one certainly was interested in New York City.
Nobody, my generation, read.
So the, as a sort of
a desperate stab at reaching an audience, they tracked me into doing this
trade paperback original, which I was very nervous about.
But in the wake of the success of Bright Lights, it's hard to argue.
A few months after it was published, it was selling 25,000, 30,000 copies a week for a long time.
It was great.
And I think maybe I reached
That critical mass, because I was in paperback, I mean, when the word of mouth was carrying this book along, I think a lot of people who might not have bought it in hardcover did.
There it was, it was $6.95 or something.
I couldn't possibly wish for it to be otherwise.
The book sold, you know, a million copies.
The sports writer was the same thing.
You saw Bell a couple years ago.
The sports writer was in the same series.
The Bell Lights was the first.
Bellas is the first vintage contemporary of the sports writer.
There was not a big first edition.
There's one reason.
I can't remember if they published 5,000 or 6,000.
It's not many of them.
And a bunch of them disintegrated.
Really, it's a very good book to find.
My editor, Alan Peacock, is that the first part, like Timbers, and he's going to FedEx it up to me.
And he's going to sign it, and he's going to ask me to sign it properly.
And he'd look for me and for him.
In any case, yeah.
Well, yeah, he found that one, you know, in the first British event in London.
Well, I'll tell you how to find it if you ever... The easy way to spot it is that all subsequent editions have a page of blurbs from the reviews right on the inside.
And the only one that doesn't is the first edition.
I don't know if it makes sense.
There weren't any blurbs.
Well, yeah, we had a couple on the cover, from Raymond Carver and Thomas McBlane.
But we didn't...
You didn't have anything on the inside except the title page.
Well, I just, I don't know, I just kind of read everything.
When I discover a
A writer that I admire, I tend to take his sentences apart a little bit and see how they work.
I mean, it's confidentiality as much as it is appreciated.
I mean, recently, after Harold Brodke died, I went back and looked at his work to see if it was as interesting as I thought when I first started reading his stories.
He's an interesting technician, you know, and I kind of really studied his senses.
Yeah.
Wow, that's not easy.
He was a prickly guy.
Really?
Yeah, very nice.
Nice man.
Most people who wrote about him, though, found him endlessly second-guessing and writing them and saying, what are you writing, versus how...
What's your schedule?
Oh, I'm supposed to be in my room about 10, 10, 15.
Can we shoot a couple pictures in?
Yeah.
I have plenty of stuff.
Really?
Yeah.
Anything else you want to add?
Are you going to say one more?
You're going to add something.
I don't know.
No, I mean, I've got a lot.
Have you got a...
I want to ask you what you're working on.
What's next?
Yeah, it is.
Actually, I wanted to say that because I don't...
I want to read when the next novel comes out.
Well, this clearly was a reaction to... I started to tell you earlier that while I was between drafts of this novel, I...
I'm kind of struggling to figure out what it might be, how I might shape it, realizing I hadn't got it where I wanted it.
And I just put it aside and wrote what turned out to be another book.
And it started out as a novella and it just kept going.
And it is...
It's a book set in New York again.
Well, I did in this book.
I just think I'll always go back to New York.
I think I'll leave New York a lot.
Okay, but I think I'll always go back to it.
So this novel is a relatively short, relatively comic novel set in New York.
And as I said earlier, I'm not sure where it fits in the plan.
Certainly, its characters are older than the characters of my previous New York novels.
They're in their 30s instead of their 20s.
They're a little more battered by life than my earlier characters, and they're maybe just a little bit wiser.
It's currently called Model Behavior.
I'm not sure if that will remain the title.
I always hesitate to...
I don't need to mention working titles since they often change, but... Oddly, it is narrated in... It's written in short sections.
Some of them are just a short paragraph.
And some are first person and some are third person.
And a couple are... A few are even second person, I think.
You don't need this on tape, do we?